Linear regression is the most important tool in statistics, data-science, and machine larning.
Every possible book in these topics has lots
of sections about this, and every data-science
team in the world is working with it. The
idea is to fit a dependent variable in terms
of a set of explanatory variables. The method
will need that the model is linear in its
parameters, so you can imagine how many possible
situations fit into this framework. A very
powerful thing about linear regression is
that the extra assumptions needed for it to
work, will be quite simple to check. One example of linear regression
could be this one:
here we have a scatterplot between x and y;
it is a plot showing all the pairs of values.
We want to explain y en terms of x.
So, in particular we might be willing to estimate this model
Here we would like to estimate this b coefficient, we would like to build inferences on it, and we would actually
be wanting to build predictions out of this model
In general I will use datasets and variables
related to online analytics, prices and sales,
ecommerce, etc. I want you to see what are
the typical problems that a data scientist
works on. We will use R because it is the
main tool in the industry and is totally free
and open source.
So, in this course we will studying linear
regression, particularly in R. Although we will quickly
review what are the basic mathematics behind
linear regression, the focus will be on the
actual modelling and computational part. We
will abuse from R's incredible capability
of loading packages, and we will see how these
packages make our life so much easier. Bear in mind that I used the word abuse and not use. Every time there is a good R package for a particular thing I will use it here
Our basic tool for fitting linear models will
be Ordinary Least Squares, where the goal
is to minimize the residual sum of squares.
In order for this to work, we will need to
make some assumptions. We will start by reviewing
the basic commands, how to verify this model
assumptions, and how to fix models where these
assumptions do not work. We will review the
computational side in R, and how our main
function lm() works. This is lm
We will also review some important practical
situations such as model selection, overfitting,
issues with pvalues, and hypothesis tests.
We will see that there is a close relationship
between doing ANOVA and doing ordinary least squares.
We will also see that there is an equivalence
between ordinary least squares and maximum
likelihood. We will analyze the plots that
R produces for linear regression, and we will
study how to identify observations with high
leverage or high residuals producing high
influence on our estimates.
We will then move into much more advanced
methods, and the complexity of the course
will increase sharply. We will analyze linear
mixed effects models in R. These models arise
when we have a grouping factor that we can
treat as random - and we will end up with a model
with fixed effects and random effects (thus
the mixed effect terminology) . We won't be
actually getting an estimate for our random
effects, but a variance component that make
all the observations belonging to the same
group, correlated. We will study in detail
the lmer() function
which belongs to the lme4 package. This will be our workhorse for
estimating these models. We will also see
how to do model selection in this framework, how to estimate
differences in the predictions for each effect,
and how to validate our model. We will see
that mixed effects models do require a much
more complex algorithmic solution (though
lmer will do everything for us), and I will
show you what lmer() is doing behind the lines.
I will show you how to actually estimate these
models optimizing the log-likelihood, and
using Generalized Least Squares.
As a general comment, we will use lots of
datasets with many variables, and in particular
I will show you how to create your own synthetic
datasets using Monte Carlo (both in fixed
effects models and in mixed effects models).
I don't think that knowing R is very important
here. Naturally, some exposure to R is beneficial,
but I designed the course not to depend on
previous R knowledge. The course has a lot
of quizes, to evaluate your knowledge. And
it also has a lot exercises with data. I share
all the code in a Github repository, where
you can download the exact same codes and
data I used. I will also try to keep this
course as updated as possible, so it is likely
I will be improving many of the sections in
the future. For example you will find that
the last section of the course is currently
on robust regression using M-estimators. Essentially,
these are models whose parameters do not change
much when we have outliers. I will most likely
be adding extra sections such as this one in the future